there's a book i've been meaning to read
since my 27th birthday
i've carried it with me around the world
from one desk to another
i've started and stopped picked it up
and put it down
and now it sits still with only a few
dozen pages read on my shelf
the word surviving genocide glimmers
slightly in gold print on the side of
the dark purple tome
a tome that has spent more time beneath
a stack of chinese textbooks than it has
on top
it is however an important book for me
in more ways than one
before the police shooting in kenosha
i'd never heard the name of the city
before
although having grown up in michigan it
neither sounded exotic
nor far away and it wasn't i could
identify it as an ojibwe word
a remnant of a language i'd always seen
scattered around the map of the great
lakes
my high school offered three foreign
languages to choose from spanish
french and german one year my elementary
school even offered
after school japanese classes that i
attended but can scarcely remember
each of these language led to a country
somewhere in the world that i could
visit one day
it was possible at least in my mind's
eye and it gave the study of the
language a clear purpose
study german go to germany and i did
just that
there was a high school trip organized
so that we could live with the german
family
practice the language of native speakers
and become in some sense
more worldly there was an implicit
problem in the lesson that we were all
supposed to learn
in spain people speak spanish in france
people speak french
in japan people speak japanese but in
america
people don't speak american we didn't
speak any american language
we spoke european languages the
difficulty of understanding or even
pronouncing place names like kenosha
remained as the sole reminder of what
was there before
ojibwe used to be spoken where i grew up
yet i had no option to learn ojibwe in
school
i didn't even know that the language
existed arriving at detroit metro
airport
there isn't a single sign printed in any
native language you'll see signs in
english
and japanese but not ojibwe as a child i
understood that japanese was an
important language
that's the main message that those signs
declare although i wouldn't have
understood signs written in ojibwe
i could have understood this much if
they had been there that the language
existed
that the language mattered and that it
had something to do with us
i went to germany to practice that
language amongst germans
imagine if it were possible for a german
to come to detroit to learn ojibwe
to see and hear it spoken amongst us
as a child the only vestiges of the
native culture were place names like
pontiac saginaw and kalamazoo
how is anyone supposed to feel about the
lack of connection between these places
and their native people
language and culture how would i feel if
i were of native ancestry myself
on the west coast of the lower peninsula
i see muskegon saugatuck
manistee the name tells us who and what
the town signifies
and yet it is of course a reminder of
something now for the most part absent
in the upper peninsula i see munising
escanaba kiwina
nobody comes to a place like kenosha
looking for the culture of the
potawatomi's
but if they did what could they possibly
find
to talk about culture in kenosha or
pontiac
would inevitably mean the culture of
either the black or white residents
and in 2020 would probably be concerning
conflict between the two
this absurdity has become so familiar
that it's easily overlooked
michigan itself is derived from the
ojibwe word mishigami
meaning big lake i wasn't taught that in
school
michigan students don't learn where the
name of their state comes from
or at least it isn't mandatory
when i was brought to mackinac island as
a child no one told me that mackinac is
from the ojibwe mission e macanang
at the place of many snapping turtles to
me it was just a place to ride a bike
eat fudge and take a tour in a
horse-drawn carriage
checking the mackinaw island website now
i find nothing that would inform
tourists that the island used to be a
tribal gathering place
native people held ceremonies and buried
their chiefs there
they spoke a language and practiced a
religion that it seemed nobody had
studied
that nobody appreciated or understood
interspersed with these names of native
etymology in michigan
are names of european origin most
obvious are the french names like
detroit
marquette and sault ste moraine or
english names like
birmingham rochester and warren
some of the more laughable names are
ipsilanti and troy
ipsilani was a hero in the greek war of
independence from the ottoman empire
and troy is of course the name of the
storied ancient city in modern day
turkey
did the people who name these places not
find it at all cruel or disrespectful to
rename indigenous lands using words from
a culture thousands of miles away
they named the city of ypsilanti after a
war hero who actually did something
heroic
but the people who colonized north
america were no heroes
they committed genocide against the
native people they enslaved people
for more continents than one and they
stripped the land of every natural
resource they could get their hands on
what does this have to do with kenosha
wisconsin
in the early 1800s over 10 000
potawatomi's lived in communities in
wisconsin
illinois michigan and indiana despite
the fact that most potawatomi's had
sided with the united states during the
black hawk war in 1832
soon thereafter a u.s commission
summoned leaders from the potawatomi
communities
and coerced them into seeding the last
of their land in illinois and wisconsin
by 1845 the government had evicted the
vast majority of pottawatomies from
their homes against their will
between 4 000 and 5 000 were moved west
of the mississippi
while at least 3 000 escaped into canada
a small number resettled along the saint
joseph river
in southern michigan assimilating into
european language
culture and religion holding out to
their new homes with the help of
catholic missionaries who
in exchange for their souls advocated on
their behalf
today their descendants the pokegon band
of the potawatomi
operate the four winds casinos there are
now only five native fluent speakers of
the potawatomi language
to say that their language is endangered
would be an understatement
the two people in government most
responsible for this act of genocide
were president andrew jackson
and lewis cass former governor of
michigan then serving as secretary of
war
jackson signed the indian removal act in
1830 and cass implemented and oversaw
indian removal
putting the act into force and so it was
almost 200 years ago that kenosha lost
its native language and culture
the only thing that remains of it now is
the city's name
jackson cass and most elected officials
thought that the native people were an
obstacle to their dream of developing
the united states into a prosperous
nation whose accomplishments would
eclipse those of all other countries of
the world
they refused to see what was actually
special about this land was not the
foreign invaders
what was special about america was the
americans themselves
meaning in this context the indigenous
people the indigenous language
the indigenous culture the land wasn't a
blank slate for drawing up a duplicate
of european culture
america had its own culture and the
europeans who called themselves american
did everything in their power to erase
it
now most americans live in a nightmare
of crumbling highways and abandoned
shopping malls
and descendants of slaves and slave
owners fight over the future of this
strange society built atop the graves of
once thriving native communities
the 1967 detroit riot left 43 dead
hundreds injured and more than one
thousand buildings destroyed
this isn't something new that just came
out of nowhere it's the culmination of
generations of americans feeling
deceived by
broken promises of liberty and justice
i remember shuffling up the stairs to my
fifth grade classroom as lee greenwood's
god bless the usa ring through the pa
system
i remember looking at the flag putting
my hand over my heart and reciting the
pledge of allegiance
i pledge allegiance to the flag of the
united states of america
and to the republic for which it stands
one nation
under god indivisible with liberty and
justice for all
many people who grew up saying this
pledge feel deceived
when they learn about our country's
history it's no surprise that they don't
believe there is now
or ever has been liberty and justice for
all
are they supposed to gloss over the
genocide in slavery
to base their sense of nationalism on
american soldiers defeating nazi germany
in world war ii
many people don't feel proud to live in
america and to me
it's not surprising in the last couple
of years i've read solomon northup's 12
years a slave the narrative of the life
of frederick douglass
andre's resenda is the other slavery and
now gradually i'm reading surviving
genocide even if it isn't always at the
top of my pile of books
i'm glad that americans have access to
these books and can learn about the
country's history on their own
however i know the president hasn't read
any of these books
i know that we're governed by men and
women proud to have been educated at
princeton and harvard
but the education they're so proud of
and that marks them out as the elite of
law schools and political science
programs
has nothing to do with these people this
history these languages
and i know this isn't covered in the
required reading of our school districts
there are children growing up now whose
only connection to the indigenous
culture
is in their struggle to pronounce and
spell the ojibwe names on the map
[Music]
you